# Multiple Sequence Alignment & Filtering


All phylogenetic methods require a set of homologous characters thus the first step is to infer which nucleotides / codons / aminocid residues are homologous to each other, so that differences among these nucleotides result only from changes that convey descent information. This process is called  Multiple Sequence Alignment (MSA) and is often followed by an additional step of detection and exclusion of those alignment regions whose homology we are uncertain of.
Due to the large amount of data which we process nowadays, this step is often overlooked and as a result it's quite easy to find misaligned loci in modern datasets. Nonetheless this is a key step, which may affect downstream analyses (see further reading for more).


Numbers of alignments For two sequences of length x and y, there are (x+y)!x! y! possible alignments. 


For three sequences, of length x , y and z say, there are (x+y+z)!x! y! z! alignments. 


For n sequences of length 10, this increases rapidly: 


| n    | alignments |
| ---- | ------- |
| 02   | 184756   |
| 03   | 5.55 × 10^12     |


n |	Hash alignments 
2 |	184756 
3 |	5.55 × 10^12 
4 |	4.71 × 10^21 
5 |	4.83 × 10^31 
6 |	3.64 × 10^42 
7 |	1.45 × 10^54 
8 |	2.38 × 10^66 
9 |	4.94 × 10^85 
10 |	2.35 × 10^92 


In general it is not possible - even with really fast computers - to perform exhaustive  multiple alignments, similarly to what happens with trees!


---


In this tutorial, we will use the most popular tools for multiple sequence alignment:

MAFFT [(Katoh and Standley 2013)](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/30/4/772/1073398)

And subsequently filter the alignments using: 

Gblocks


Let's start with a look at one of our single copy orthogroups with the ```cat``` command:

```
cat data/Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/N0.HOG0000020.fa
```


The sequences are not aligned yet: this is the reason why they contain no gaps and differ in length!


---


## aligning PCGs with MAFFT:

MAFFT is a very fast tool, which implements several different algorithms which makes it also very versatile.

Let's start using the code:

```
mafft --auto data/Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/N0.HOG0000020.fa > data/Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/N0.HOG0000020.aln
```

MAFFT contains many parameters, which you are encouraged to explore: an important one is the gap-opening penalty which by default is 1.53. Let's try a different value, using the code:

```
mafft --auto --op 7 data/Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/N0.HOG0000020.fa > data/Single_Copy_Orthologue_Sequences/N0.HOG0000020.aln
```

Last but not least: we leveraged the --auto flag of MAFFT, which automatically decides which is the best algorithm for carrying out the MSA, but several [algorithms](https://mafft.cbrc.jp/alignment/software/algorithms/algorithms.html) are implemented and the user can decide which one to rely on.


We can then inspect the outcome using Aliview: let's take some time to see if there is any difference between the two gap-opening penalty values.


Try to write a script to align all OGs

In order to simplify our lessons and to gain a better understanding of the processes we restricted the number of genes to two / three. In real analyses usually hundreds or thousands of loci are used and thus the need to automate processes is quite strong. For loops are one possible solution:


---


## alignment filtering:

The quality of multiple sequence alignments plays an important role in the accuracy of phylogenetic inference. It has been shown that removing certain positions (generally the ones which show an ambiguous homology and/or are highly variable) can improve the overall performance of many phylogenetic reconstruction methods. 
While dealing modern phylogenetic dataset, which consists of hundred to thousands of alignments is not possible to have a manual curation for each one, and thus it is necessary to automatically remove alignment errors.

In this tutorial we will use Gblocks:  this software will select blocks of conserved sites, which can be defined with many custom parameters, described in the [manual](http://molevol.cmima.csic.es/castresana/Gblocks/Gblocks_documentation.html)

We will use the susequent parameters and leave the rest to the default:

* -t= p (protein) d (DNA) c (codons) 
* -b4 Minimum Length Of A Block
* -b5 Allowed Gap Positions

Let's use this string one PCGs gene:

```
Gblocks ND2_p_aligned.n.fasta -t=d -b4=5 -b5=a
```


The analyses will generate two kind of files:

* ```-gb```: filtered fasta files 
* ```-gb.htm```: for visualising which position got removed


---


#### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25)