# half course recap

We learned a lot in the last three weeks!

- In the 1st week we explored some general concepts of phylogenetics.
- In the 2nd week we understood what we wanted to compare and how to identify that.
- In the 3rd week we understood the difference between distance-based and the two main charachter-based methods: ML and BI.

Now I think it is time to take some mental rest and have some concepts settle down. This lesson is devoted to questions and practical excercises, but we will start by strengthening your understanfing of the fundamentals of our practicals.

---

### basics of bioinformatics refresher

For a quick refresher go [here](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25/blob/main/practicals/refresher.md).

---

### perform your first phylogenomic analyses

You might reckon that I had an orthology inference for you which you can find [here](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25/blob/main/data/OrthoFinder.zip).

What I want you to do is to start by retrieving single copy orthologues.

>#### Question!
>Why are we using single copy orthologues to perform phylogenetic inference?

---

Then you should align them with ```mafft``` and filter them with ```Gblocks```, using a ```for``` loop!

After that you should concatenate them using ```AMAS```. 

>#### Question!
>Concatenating the outcome of Gblocks will not work. :-P Or at least, it would look like it worked, but then it becomes clear it did not if you open the file. :-P Suggestion ... use ```awk```!

---

When you have a proper concatenation, I want you to:

- Do a ML search merging partitions.

- Do a BI search with a single partition and obtain a single MCC tree.

>#### Question!
>Root the tree on the correct outgroup, Helobdella robusta, an Anellidae among Mollusca. Are the two trees the same??!

---

#### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25)