# statistical support in phylogenetics

Phylogenetic trees are almost always just hypotheses and they should be treated us such. In this perspective, it's important to know how much we can be confident in respect to our findings: there are several possibilities which take into consideration the whole tree, but it's also possible to calculating several metrics of clade support, specifically for each node. Here are the more frequently used in IQ-TREE:

Parametric & Nonparametric bootstrap
SH-like approximate likelihood ratio test
I really like this explanation of parametric and non-parametric bootstrap:

Non-parametric bootstrapping was developed by Efron in 1979 as a general statistical method for estimating the parameters of an unknown probability distribution by resampling from an existing sample that was drawn from this distribution. The method was transferred to phylogenetic reconstruction by Felsenstein in this paper from 1985. Within molecular phylogenetics it works as follows: from an alignment of length n, columns are randomly drawn with replacement n times. The drawn columns are arranged in a new dataset, a bootstrapped alignment of length n. From this bootstrapped alignment, a phylogenetic tree is constructed by following the same method of phylogenetic analysis as was used for the analysis of the original alignment. This process of constructing bootstrap alignments and bootstrap trees is repeated a large number of times, and the resulting trees are stored. The percentage with which a certain bipartition of the taxon set is present in the bootstrap trees (the bootstrap value) can be taken as a measure of how homogeneously this bipartition of sequences (i.e., the respective branch in the underlying topology) is supported by the data. Bootstrap values are often summarized by constructing the majority-rule consensus from the bootstrap trees or by annotating them on the "best" tree.

In a probabilistic context, there is an alternative way of generating replicate alignments from given data by computer simulation. This approach proposed by Efron in 1985 is model-based, and hence is commonly referred to as parametric bootstrapping. In its first step, a model of DNA substitution and a phylogenetic tree T are estimated from the original alignment X. Using this model, replicate alignments Xi are generated, i.e., sequences are simulated along T. Subsequently, phylogenetic trees Ti are computed for each of the alignments Xi, and branch support values are derived (as in non-parametric bootstrapping) by computing the percentage with which a certain branch occurs in the set of generated trees Ti. Support values derived by parametric bootstrapping depend to a large extent on the model estimated from the original alignment. For this reason the method can be used for testing the model inferred from the original alignment as a null hypothesis (Goldman 1993).

Along with its non-replacement version (not too popular nowadays):

The jackknife is a resampling method closely related to non-parametric bootstrapping. It works by randomly deleting a certain percentage of columns from the original alignment. Usually 50 per cent of the columns are deleted (delete-half jackknife proposed by Felsenstein in 1985), which is equivalent to drawing n/2 columns from the original alignment of length n without replacement. As in non-parametric bootstrapping, the resampling is iterated, trees are computed from the jackknife alignments, and branch-support values are derived as the percentage with which a certain branch is present in the jackknife topologies.

Adapted (slightly) from: M. David Posada. Bioinformatics for DNA Sequence Analysis, Springer Protocols, pp.113-137 Methods in Molecular Biology.

The functioning of aLRT is quite interesting as well:

The approximate likelihood ratio test (aLRT) for branches is closely related to a conventional LRT. The standard LRT uses the test statistics 2(L1 −L0), where L1 (alternative hypothesis) is the log-likelihood of the current tree and L0 (null hypothesis) is the log-likelihood of the same tree, but with the branch of interest being collapsed. The aLRT approximates this test statistics in a slightly conservative but practical way, where L2 corresponds to the second best NNI configuration around the branch of interest. Such test is fast because the log-likelihood value L2 is computed by optimising only over the branch of interest and the four adjacent branches, while other parameters are fixed at their optimal values corresponding to the best ML tree. Thus, the aLRT does not account for other possible topologies that would be highly likely but quite different from the current topology. This implies that the aLRT performs well when the data contains a clear phylogenetic signal, but not as well in the opposite case, where it tends to give a local view on the branch of interest only. Note that parametric branch supports are based on the assumption that the evolutionary model used to infer the trees is the correct one. The rational behind the aLRT clearly differs from bootstrap. Basically, while aLRT values are derived from testing hypotheses, the bootstrap proportion is a repeatability measure.

Adapted from: Guindon et al., 2009. Estimating maximum likelihood phylogenies with PhyML.

Let's get some hands-on:

Nonparametric bootstrap

The standard nonparametric bootstrap is invoked by the -b option, which also specifies the number of bootstrap replicates (100 is the minimum recommended number).

 iqtree -s ND2_p_aligned.n.gb.fasta -b 100
Parametric bootstrap:

IQ-TREE implements UFB2 - Ultra Fast Bootstrap 2 described in Hoang et al., 2018 The -B flag specifies the number of replicates where 1000 is the minimum number recommended. IQ-TREE also has the option to further optimize each bootstrap tree using a hill-climbing nearest neighbor interchange (NNI) search, based directly on the corresponding bootstrap alignment. It's specified through the -bnni  option to reduce the risk of overestimating branch supports with UFBoot due to severe model violations.

 iqtree -s ND2_p_aligned.n.gb.fasta -bb 1000 -bnni
SH-like approximate likelihood ratio test:

IQ-TREE implements a non-parametric approximate likelihood ratio test based on a Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like procedure via the flag -alrt.

 iqtree -s ND2_p_aligned.n.gb.fasta -alrt 1000
We can combine the three metrics in the same analysis and have them annotated on the "best" Maximum Likelilhood phylogeny. It's then easier to observe wether the different support metrics are giving contrasting results through our phylogenies.

iqtree -s ND2_p_aligned.n.gb.fasta -bb 1000 -bnni -b 10 -alrt 1000 -redo
Let's take a look at the .iqtree among the other output files, bearing in mind that the values related to different metrics should be treated differently: with the non-parametric bootstrap and SH-aLRT you should start to believe in a clade if it has >= 80% support, while with UFBoot it should be >= 95%,

To conclude: there are several metrics of support in phylogenetics which can provide different perspective on the confidence of a clade/bipartition. Moreover they can sometimes be informative of biological processes! Aside the traditional ones (which we just went trough) some new ones get proposed and/or implemented from time to time. This is the case of gCF and sCF (genes and sites Concordance Factors) for which I left some additional information in the further reading paragraph at the end of the lesson. Moreover consider that different frameworks can have different support metrics, as the Posterior Probabilities (PP) in the Bayesian Inference.





















where with ```-bb 1000``` we are specifing the number of parametric bootstrap replicates ( actually, a slightly different version, called **UFB2** - **Ultra FastBootstrap 2** - described in [Hoang et al., 2018](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/35/2/518/4565479)

The outputs generated will be the same as the ones produced by the unpartitioned analysis. 
Among the large number of parameters which can affect the tree search process in IQ-TREE, IMHO some of the more decisive are:

Bootstrap options:

 * ```-bnni``` = further optimitation of each bootstrap tree using a hill-climbing nearest neighbor interchange (NNI) search, based directly on the corresponding bootstrap alignment. Usefull to reduce the risk of overestimating branch supports with UFBoot due to severe model violations. 
 * ```-nm``` = Specify the maximum number of iterations to stop (*DEFAULT* 1000). If after 1000 iterations bootstrap values still not convergence, it will give up (usually it is increased).

Tree search options:

 * ```-nstop``` = specify number of unsuccesfull iterations to stop (DEFAULT 100). If after 100 iterations it is not finding a new best tree, it will give up (usually increased).
 * ```-pers``` = specify perturbation strength (between 0 and 1) for randomized NNI, default is 0.5.

Moreover, is a good practice to run at least 10 IQ-TREE runs and chose the one with the bes logL values. It can be found in the ```.iqtree``` file. In this way you can be a little bit more sure that your tree is not stucked in a local optima.

Now let's open the tree (it should be called specie.tree.treefile) and compare it to:

  * The one obtained directly with Orthofinder.
  * The phylogenomic from [Kocot et al., 2020](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-019-56728-w).

Finally, there are several metrics of support in phylogenetics which can provide different perspective on the confidence of a clade/bipartition. Moreover they can sometimes be informative of biological processes (such as fast evolutionary radiations, genes with interesting evolutionary histories ...)! Beside the traditional ones (as bootstrap and jacknife, here not discussed) some new ones get proposed and/or implemented from time to time. For example IQ-TREE implements at least three other types of nodal support metrics:

  * **1. SH-like approximate likelihood ratio test:** a non-parametric approximate likelihood ratio test based on a Shimodaira-Hasegawa-like procedure implemented in IQ-TREE via the flag ```-alrt```.
  * **2. Likelihood mapping analysis:** not covered here but see IQ-TREE manual and [Strimmer and Haeseler, 1997](https://www.pnas.org/content/94/13/6815.long) for original publication.
  * **3. CFs:** ([Minh et al., 2020](https://academic.oup.com/mbe/article/37/9/2727/5828940)) two measures for quantifying genealogical concordance in phylogenomic datasets: the gene concordance factor (**gCF**) and the site concordance factor (**sCF**). For every branch of a reference tree, gCF is defined as the percentage of “decisive” gene trees containing that branch. sCF is defined as the percentage of decisive alignment sites supporting a branch in the reference tree. sCF is a novel measure that is particularly useful when individual gene alignments are relatively uninformative, such that gene trees are uncertain.

Now let's perform CFs calculation with the following command:

```
mkdir Analyses/IQ-TREE/CFs
iqtree -t Analyses/IQ-TREE/specie.tree.treefile --gcf Analyses/IQ-TREE/Gene_Trees/loci.treefile -p Analyses/1-to-1_Alignments/gblock/ --scf 100 --prefix Analyses/IQ-TREE/CFs/concord
```

and take a look at the resulting nodal support values on figtree (compared them each other and against BS).

If we had time, what could we do to improve our phylogeny? Well, a lot of things can be done.

  * **1.** Increase the taxon sampling.
  * **2.** Increase the sample of loci.
  * **3.** We can use softwares like Phylotreepruner to remove orthologs that does not follow a taxonomic constrain (imposed by strong bibliography knowledge, *e.g* monophyly of Bivalvia).
  * **4.** We can try to change the outgroup (very common).
  * **5.** We can check if there are some compositional biases in our dataset and in case remove them (*e.g.* Aliscore).
  * **6.** If we can confidentialy put some constrains on the tree (or we want just to test these hypotesis) we can build up a partially constrained tree and calculates the partition log-likelihoods on both the constrained and uncostrained trees. In this way we can indentify partitions that support more one topology or the other and take a deeper look at them. Another way to do a similar thing, is to calculate RF distances between each gene tree and the constrained/uncostrained trees.
  * **7.** We can check for saturation (*e.g* identifying faster evolving genes/sites).

...And **A LOT** of other stuff (*e.g* tree topology testing, likelihood mapping, site log-likelihoods ...), almost always inside IQ-TREE (take a look [here](http://www.iqtree.org/doc/Command-Reference)for a complete list of IQ-TREE functions).

However, remember that your results should be always presented, discussed and justified comparing them to bibliography!




















## Posterior Probabilities & nodal support overestimation: 

As we have seen before, different metrics of nodal support are associated with different approaches to the phylogenetic inference. BI analyses are associated to Posterior Probabilities - also called clade credibility values - which are calculated from the frequencies  with which they occur in the trees sampled at the stationary state, ranging from 0 to 1. PPs are substantially the proportion of the time  that a bipartition is found and should be considered as an approximation of the posterior probability of the bipartition.

Nonetheless, as we said before, different metrics have different pitfalls and PPs habe been often associated with an overestimation of support especially when data sets with a lot of characters are used and in the presence of small branchlenghts. Generally speaking, standard measures of clade support, such as posterior probabilities and bootstrap proportions, can support several conflicting hypotheses with high support. But this apparent confidence can hinder phylogenetic uncertainty, which can be observed when different metrics are compared and trying to investigate the degree of reproducibility of ou results (different analytical frameworks and inference parameters). You'll find a couple of interesting papers down below!


A couple of nice papers on how the nodal support can be overestimated by [BP](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ympev.2014.01.018) and [PP](https://doi.org/10.1080/10635150590924208). 










## further reading: 

Resources on concordance factors: [paper](https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/487801v2) & [tutorial](http://www.robertlanfear.com/blog/files/concordance_factors.html).

[Here](http://www.iqtree.org/doc/iqtree-doc.pdf) you'll find the manual for IQ-TREE, it's quite user-friendly and exhaustive.

---

### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25/tree/main)

