# hypothesis testing

… as we saind during the thoery session … phylogenetic trees are just … hypotheses … and we can test them!

---

### Constrained tree search

IQ-TREE supports constrained tree search via ```-g``` option, so that the resulting tree must obey a constraint tree topology. The constraint tree can be multifurcating and need not to contain all species.

In our most recurrent example we have 7 Mollusk species taken from public database and one Annelidae outgroup, *Helobdella robusta*.

* *Biomphalaria glabrata* (B_glabrata)
* *Acanthopleura granulata* (A_granulata)
* *Crassostrea virginica* (C_virginica)
* *Lottia gigantea* (L_gigantea)
* *Octopus bimaculoides* (O_bimaculoides)
* *Sinivicula constricta* (S_constricta)
* *Pinctada fucata* (P_fucata)

Let's assume we have some prior knowledge that Acanthopleura granulata, Biomphalaria glabrata, and Crassostrea virginica are closely related to each other and that they are in a sister relationship with _Lottia gigantea_ and _Octopus bimaculoides_. We can enforce this arrangement using a ```newick``` syntax as this one: ```((A_granulata,B_glabrata,C_virginica),(L_gigantea,O_bimaculoides));```. 

Save that to a file ```example.constrain```. __NB:__ do not forget the semicolon! then run:

```iqtree -s data/example_alignements/aa/concatenated.out -m LG+G -g example.constrain --prefix constrained```

While this option helps to enforce the tree based on prior knowledge, it is advised to always perform tree topology tests to make sure that the resulting constrained tree is NOT significantly worse than an unconstrained tree! 

Before exploring tree topology tests between the constrained and unconstrained trees, perform an unconstrained tree search:

```iqtree -s data/example_alignements/aa/concatenated.out -m LG+G --prefix unconstrained```

### Task:

> Come up with a different topological constraint and write it using the ```newick``` syntax in a ```example.constrain_2``` file. Then execute an additional constrained tree inference.

---

### likelihoods of a set of trees

IQ-TREE can compute log-likelihoods of a set of trees in ```newick``` format passed a file via the ```-z``` option

Let's build the file with the two trees with:

```cat *.treefile > trees_to_test.nwk```

and then let's calculate the likelihood of the trees

```iqtree -s data/example_alignements/aa/concatenated.out -z trees_to_test.nwk -m LG+G```

 IQ-TREE first reconstructs an ML tree. Then, it will compute the log-likelihood of the trees in ```trees_to_test.nwks``` based on the estimated parameters done for the ML tree. The ```.iqtree``` file will have a section called ```USER TREES``` that lists the tree IDs and the corresponding log-likelihoods.

---

### Tree topology tests

IQ-TREE also supports several tree topology tests using the RELL approximation:

-  ```-zb``` specifies the number of RELL replicates and will perform the BP, KH, SH, and ELW tests

- ```-au``` specifies the approximately unbiased test.

All tests can be performed using:

```iqtree -s data/example_alignements/aa/concatenated.out -m LG+G -z trees_to_test.nwk -n 0 -zb 1000 -au```

Now look at the ```USER TREES``` section in the ```.iqtree``` file and discuss it!

---

### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25/tree/main)