# concatenation-based versus coalescence-based inferences

 For this purpose, IQ-TREE implements the Robinson-Foulds distances calculation, a metric able to compare topologies between **binary** but **unrooted** trees (see [here](https://www.cs.hmc.edu/~hadas/mitcompbio/treedistance.html) for an in-depth explanation on computational methods). In brief it measures the symmetric difference between two trees by adding the number of splits (*i.e* edges) that are present in tree A (but not tree B) to the number of splits present in tree B (but not tree A).






---

### unpartitioned inference:


Until now we found the best-fit model of evolution without doing tree reconstruction, but we can perform both the search for the best-fit model and the phylogenetic inference by just using the ```-m MFP``` flag. After ModelFinder, IQ-TREE will immediately start the tree reconstruction under the best-fit partition model. 

A good practice in phylogenetic inference is to build up single gene trees, in this way you can get usefull informations about your markers (are all gene trees telling you the same story? Which are the more informative markers? Are present markers with a different evolutionary history compared to others? Which markers shows more concordance with bibliography knowledge?). If we have a lot of markers, as in our case, we can quickly build up gene trees using ```-S``` flag followed by the name of the directory were are stored the alignments.

```
iqtree -S data/example_alignements/ --prefix data/gene_trees
```

IQ-TREE automatically detects the directory and loads all alignments within.

Here are the outputs:

* ```.best_scheme.nex``` best fit partitioning scheme (in our case is just one partition for gene).
* ```.best_model.nex``` best-fit evolutionary model for each partition. 
* ```.iqtree``` is the analysis report.
* ```.model.gz``` is the complete evolutionary model.
* ```.treefile``` is the set Maximum Likelihood gene trees.
* ```.log``` is the screen log.
* ```.ckp.gz``` is just a checkpoint file. 

>Remember that most phylogenetic programs produce unrooted trees, as they are not aware about any biological background. We can root them using our *a priori* biological knowledge or use approches as the mid point rooting.

From the ```.treefile``` we can easly extract single gene trees if we want to manually look at them (**NB:** trees are in the same order as input data, unfortunately they are not annotated). However, if we have a lot of loci, is better to first find an automatic way able to easly highlights and summarize differences between a set of trees.







---

### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25/tree/main)