# systematic and stochastic bias + phylogenetic subsampling

To intuitively get a grasp of one of the more frquent phylogenetic artifacts - long branch attractio or LBA - open the file ```bias.aln``` in the folder ```bias.aln```. I have duplicated two sequences Ptetracirrhus_bias and Ovulgaris_bias from the original Ptetracirrhus and Ovulgaris , and I wish you to insert as may As and Ts as you can in these squences, kind of simulating a parallel evolution of these two lineage, but where a lot more evolutionary changes happened, but only proe to GC. ... then infer a quick tree using ```iqtree -s data/example_bias/biased.aln``` and take a look at the tree ...

---

### mixture models

Let's start by concatenating again the MSAs

```bash
AMAS.py concat -i data/example_bias/alignments/* -t bias_concat.faa.aln -f fasta -d aa
```

Then we can perform two inference, for which I previously performed model selection:

- a first one assuming an unpartitioned model with precasted aminoacid matrix:

```bash
iqtree -s bias_concat.faa.aln -mset LG -mrate G4 --prefix bias_simple_model -nt auto -fast
```

- a second one using a profile mixtutre model:

```bash
iqtree -s bias_concat.faa.aln -mset LG+C10 -mrate G4 --prefix bias_profile_mixt -nt auto -fast
```

### task!

> Are the two trees different? It is kind of hard to tell ... maybe you could use ```ete3``` to calculate some normalyzed RF distances. Otherwise, you have a file named ```annotation.tsv``` in the```data/example_bias/alignements/``` folder and you might want to try import it into ```Figtree``` alongside with the two trees and then colour tips based on wether species are endosymionts or free-living.

---

### data recoding

Let's try to recode our data, using a custom python script:

```bash
python data/example_bias/recode_protein_sequences.py -i bias_concat.faa.aln -o ../../bias_concat.rec.aln -s RS4
```

By specifying ```-s RS4``` this simple script substitute:

- AGNPST with A; Alanine, Glycine, Asparagine, Proline, Serine and Threonine share polarity.
- CHWY with C; Cysteine, Histidine, Tryptophan and Tyrosine share aromaticity.
- DEKQR to G; Aspartic Acid, Glutamic Acid, Lysine, Glutamine and Arginine share the charge.
- FILMVR to T; Phenylalanine, Isoleucine, Leucine, Methionine, Valine share hydrophobicity.

---

# HRS assumptions

Traditional model relyes on the assumption that evolution of DNA sequences follow a markov process. However, again, it may not *always* be true. For this reason IQ-TREE implements three *matched-pairs tests of symmetry* ([Naser-Khdour et al., 2019](https://academic.oup.com/gbe/article/11/12/3341/5571717)) to test the two assumptions of *stationarity* and *homogeneity*. Let's perform this test using:

```bash
iqtree -S data/example_bias/alignments --symtest-only
```

The three important columns in the ```data/example_bias/alignments.symtest.csv``` output are:

- SymPval: a small p-value (p < 0.05) indicates that the assumptions of stationarity or homogeneity or both is rejected.
- MarPval: a small p-value means that the assumption of stationarity is rejected.
- IntPval: a small p-value means that the homogeneity assumption is reject. 

### task!

> Which alignments reject the two assumptions of *stationarity* and *homogeneity*?

---

LMAP to use only informative genes

```bash
iqtree -s 100%_aa_aln.fa -lmap 2000 -n 0 -m LG
```

---

### task!

> Now that you have gather some informations on your MSAs, you can perform phylogenetic subsampling! Concatenate only the partitions which do respect phylogenetic assumptions and which have a strong phylogenetic signal ... and see what happens :-P

---

### [main](https://github.com/for-giobbe/MP25/tree/main)
